Website: [motomutterers.com](https://www.motomutterers.com)

## Motomutterers Fantasy League
This fantasy league is based on the MotoGP racing series, it started on the [motomatters.com](https://motomatters.com) forum, where some of the users decided to create the fantasy league. Initially, it was tracked by one of the users using an Excel sheet, where they would manually change the real life riders points. Members of the league would select their top 5 riders (the riders who finished in the top 5 at the end of the championship)., and their points were calculated by adding up the points of their picks. After the first year, the guy managing the fantasy league gave up the charge, and my dad took his spot, initially he did all the math on his own. After a couple months he asked me if i were to be able to create a program that would facilitate this process, and I did that (C++). This program was used for a couple years, and it evolved quite a lot to the point where he could update it through the program itself, and retrieve the race results through the internet (web scraping). I then started the CS50W Harvard web course to give websites a try, and I proposed to make him a website for the fantasy league, at the time there were about 35 members participating. After 1.5 years I was able to make the website, and I used it as the final project to finish the course. Since the website's launch, the league has grown significantly, with the 2025 season marking the first to use the website and nearly tripling the number of participants to 96.

## Challenges and Key Systems
#### Competitors model
Any time I reference competitors its the same as riders mentioned on the website, in the beginning I created it like this and realized too late to change it. The competitors model ended up being the most abstract part of the website, this is because it is included in many other parts of the website and to keep data consistency, it was necessary to do it this way. These are the layers:
- **Competitor**: This layer holds the essential data: number and name
- **Competitor Points**: This layer holds the pointer to competitor and a points attribute, having points separated from the competitor was necessary because the competitors the members pick point to the same Competitor points as the season competitors, this is so that when points from the competitors in the season are subtracted, the server doesn't have to go through all the picks and subtract their points too, this would be costly.
- **Competitor Position**: This layer holds a pointer to the Competitor Points instance and a position attribute, this is used for races and users picks, where for example, the competitor positions from the users picks point to the same Competitor Points instance as the Season competitors.
- **Season Competitor Position**: This layer holds a pointer to the Competitor Points instance, you could say its at the same level as the Competitor Position model and its separate because it needs attributes like: independent and rookie (the members now select a top independent and rookie too), and don't make sense to be saving in a position from a race result

#### Competitors Serializers
With all this abstraction, the serializers were probably the most difficult part to get running right. To summarize, the serializers are able to dynamically detect when its necessary to create a new Competitor or Competitor Points, or to reference said models. This came in very handy specifically with the member's picks, because the system was able to automatically detect that they will point to exisiting Competitor Points instances, and when creating races, new Competitor Points were created, but would point to an already created Competitor. This system took a lot of time and iterations to get to this point.

#### React 
When I started programming the website, it was my first time working with React, and there was definitely a lot of changes during the development, the frontend went through multiple refactors and code cleanup, and there are a definitely still quite a lot of components I would modify, but the most important part, not breaking the rules, I think I have accomplished quite well. In the beginning there was a lot of direct DOM manipulation, for animations, hiding, opening, etc, and currently there are none. All the DOM manipulations were replaced with utility components, and I am content with how it ended up, there will definitely be improvements as I keep changing the website, but i'm quite satisfied with it's current state.

## ChatGPT
ChatGPT was used a lot in the website's development, it helped me learn new aspects of Django and React and to correctly implement them and debug very strange errors. While I didn’t always like the code it generated or find it in line with my coding style, I would say it helped point me in the correct direction. For example with the serializers, competitor abstraction and general system design, I had to come up with my own solutions most of the time, but ChatGPT helped orientate solve problems. It definitely helped speed up the development and my understanding of the technologies, like a personal tutor.

## Conclusions
I found that working on projects for fun and working on projects that are actually used by people are very different experiences, it forces a lot of focus on user friendly-ness, especially with this website, since from the start I knew it was going to be older people (around 50) that were going to register, I had to make the UI simple and functional, so far no one has sent an email asking how the website works. Another benefit of making software with real users registered is continuos improvement and polishing. When I submitted the website as the final project for the CS50W course, it was very different to what it is now in so many aspects, and it gives a certain satisfaction to make something that people actually use and like to use. After building this website, its given me a new perspective on programming, the thought of having people actually use it motivates me a lot to keep improving it and learning new technologies.